memory-bank/activeContext.md, before:

# Active Context

## 🎯 **Current Status: Fresh Database Baseline Validation**

### **Project Reality Check: COMPLETED**
- **Database State**: Fresh PostgreSQL/PostGIS database (recently dropped and recreated)
- **Data Volume**: ZERO - empty database ready for baseline testing
- **Current Scope**: 3x3 tile grid in central Riyadh for pipeline validation
- **Business Objective**: Commercial data capture for client sales (not Suhail platform development)

### **Git Baseline: ESTABLISHED**
- ✅ **Clean Repository**: All outdated files removed (27 files, 5,756 deletions)
- ✅ **Baseline Tag**: `v0.1.0-baseline` created for clean starting point
- ✅ **Testing Branch**: `test/3x3-riyadh-baseline` ready for validation
- ✅ **Schema Migrations**: Fresh Alembic migration with robust PostGIS design

## 🔄 **Active Work: Phase 1 Baseline Validation**

### **1.1 3x3 Riyadh Baseline Test** (IN PROGRESS)
**Objective**: Validate basic pipeline functionality with fresh database

**Current Tasks**:
- [ ] **Install Package**: Set up development environment with `uv add -e .`
- [ ] **Run Geometric Pipeline**: Execute `meshic-pipeline geometric` for 9-tile processing
- [ ] **Verify Database Population**: Confirm parcels and reference tables populated
- [ ] **Validate Schema**: Check data types and foreign key relationships
- [ ] **Test Enrichment**: Run `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100`

**Expected Results**:
- ~1,000-2,000 parcels from 3x3 grid in central Riyadh
- All reference tables (provinces, municipalities, etc.) populated from MVT data
- Foreign key relationships functioning properly
- High enrichment success rate (95%+ expected)

### **Current Environment Status**
- **Database**: Fresh PostGIS schema with robust spatial design
- **Pipeline**: Functional async architecture ready for testing
- **Configuration**: Province-specific tile servers configured
- **Dependencies**: All packages ready for installation via `uv`

## 📋 **Next Phase Planning**

### **Phase 2: Multi-Province Validation** (UPCOMING)
**Objective**: Confirm database handles multiple provinces safely

**Strategy**:
1. **Second Province Test**: Small grid in different province (Eastern or different Riyadh area)
2. **Verify No Conflicts**: Ensure data separation and no overwriting
3. **Test Enrichment**: Validate API integration with multi-province data

### **Phase 3: Full Province Scale** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Scale to complete province processing

**Scope**: 
- Full Riyadh province (52x52 grid showed 1M+ parcels in previous testing)
- All 6 Saudi provinces (estimated 6M+ parcels total)
- Dynamic boundary discovery system development

## 🎯 **Active Decisions and Considerations**

### **Commercial Focus**
- **Primary Goal**: Extract Saudi real estate data for client analytics products
- **Revenue Model**: Data capture and value-add services for client sales
- **Not Platform Development**: This is data extraction, not Suhail platform enhancement

### **Technical Priorities**
1. **Database as Source of Truth**: Fresh schema is authoritative, all docs must align
2. **Systematic Validation**: Don't skip testing phases - validate each step
3. **Multi-Province Capability**: Ensure architecture scales across all 6 provinces
4. **Chunked Processing**: Handle large datasets efficiently with proper batching

### **Development Approach**
- **Start Small**: 3x3 baseline test first
- **Scale Gradually**: Multi-province → Full province → All provinces
- **Track Performance**: Monitor processing times and database performance
- **Maintain Quality**: High enrichment success rates and data integrity

## 🛠 **Current Technical Context**

### **Database Architecture**
- **Type**: PostgreSQL with PostGIS spatial extensions
- **State**: Recently reset with robust schema design
- **Migration Tool**: Alembic for all schema changes
- **Design**: Multi-province capable with proper foreign key relationships

### **Pipeline Architecture**
- **Language**: Python 3.11+ with async/await patterns
- **Processing**: Chunked batch processing with memory management
- **API Integration**: Suhail API endpoints for enrichment data
- **CLI**: Unified command interface for all operations

### **Data Sources**
- **MVT Tiles**: Province-specific tile servers (riyadh, eastern_region, etc.)
- **Enrichment APIs**: api2.suhail.ai for transactions, building rules, price metrics
- **Coordinate System**: EPSG:4326 with proper CRS handling

## 📊 **Success Metrics for Current Phase**

### **Baseline Validation Success**
- [ ] 3x3 grid processes without errors
- [ ] Database populated with expected structure
- [ ] Foreign key relationships functional
- [ ] Enrichment success rate >95%
- [ ] No pipeline errors or data corruption

### **Technical Validation Success**
- [ ] Package installation works smoothly
- [ ] CLI commands execute properly
- [ ] Database connections stable
- [ ] Memory usage reasonable
- [ ] Processing times acceptable

### **Quality Assurance Success**
- [ ] Spatial data accuracy maintained
- [ ] Arabic text handling works properly
- [ ] API integration functional
- [ ] Error handling graceful
- [ ] Logging comprehensive

## 🔄 **Current Work Environment**

### **Development Setup**
```bash
# Environment activation
source .venv/bin/activate

# Package installation
uv add -e .

# Core testing commands
meshic-pipeline geometric               # 3x3 baseline test
meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100  # Enrichment validation
python scripts/check_db.py             # Database validation
```

### **Git Workflow**
```bash
# Current branch
test/3x3-riyadh-baseline

# Success tagging strategy
git tag v0.1.1-3x3-validated    # After successful baseline
git tag v0.1.2-enrichment-validated   # After enrichment success
```

## 📝 **Documentation Alignment Status**

### **Memory Bank Accuracy**
- ✅ **Project Brief**: Updated to reflect commercial objectives
- ✅ **TODO.md**: Rewritten for actual baseline validation plan
- 🔄 **Active Context**: Currently being updated (this file)
- 🔄 **Progress**: Needs update to reflect fresh database state
- 🔄 **System Patterns**: Needs alignment with actual implementation
- 🔄 **Tech Context**: Needs update for baseline testing scope

### **Critical Corrections Made**
- **Scale Claims**: Removed inflated parcel counts - database is empty
- **Enhanced Discovery**: Removed claims about working hotspot system - needs to be built
- **Business Context**: Clarified commercial data capture vs platform development
- **Current State**: Emphasized fresh database and baseline testing approach

## 🎯 **Immediate Next Steps**

1. **Complete Memory Bank Alignment**: Finish updating all files to reflect reality
2. **Execute Baseline Test**: Run 3x3 pipeline and validate results
3. **Document Actual Results**: Update progress with real metrics from testing
4. **Plan Multi-Province Test**: Prepare for next validation phase
5. **Track Performance**: Establish baseline metrics for scaling decisions

This active context reflects the actual current state: fresh database, commercial objectives, and systematic baseline validation approach to build a robust foundation for full Saudi Arabia data capture.

Commit message:

Robustify pipeline table upsert/replace logic, document uniqueness strategy, and update memory bank/action plan

memory-bank/activeContext.md, after:

# Active Context (Updated)

## 🎯 **Current Status: Fresh Database Baseline Validation**

### **Project Reality Check: COMPLETED**
- **Database State**: Fresh PostgreSQL/PostGIS database (recently dropped and recreated)
- **Data Volume**: ZERO - empty database ready for baseline testing
- **Current Scope**: 3x3 tile grid in central Riyadh for pipeline validation
- **Business Objective**: Commercial data capture for client sales (not Suhail platform development)

### **Git Baseline: ESTABLISHED**
- ✅ **Clean Repository**: All outdated files removed (27 files, 5,756 deletions)
- ✅ **Baseline Tag**: `v0.1.0-baseline` created for clean starting point
- ✅ **Testing Branch**: `test/3x3-riyadh-baseline` ready for validation
- ✅ **Schema Migrations**: Fresh Alembic migration with robust PostGIS design

## 🔄 **Active Work: Phase 1 Baseline Validation**

### **1.1 3x3 Riyadh Baseline Test** (IN PROGRESS)
**Objective**: Validate basic pipeline functionality with fresh database

**Current Tasks**:
- [ ] **Install Package**: Set up development environment with `uv add -e .`
- [ ] **Run Geometric Pipeline**: Execute `meshic-pipeline geometric` for 9-tile processing
- [ ] **Verify Database Population**: Confirm parcels and reference tables populated
- [ ] **Validate Schema**: Check data types and foreign key relationships
- [ ] **Test Enrichment**: Run `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100`

**Expected Results**:
- ~1,000-2,000 parcels from 3x3 grid in central Riyadh
- All reference tables (provinces, municipalities, etc.) populated from MVT data
- Foreign key relationships functioning properly
- High enrichment success rate (95%+ expected)

### **Current Environment Status**
- **Database**: Fresh PostGIS schema with robust spatial design
- **Pipeline**: Functional async architecture ready for testing
- **Configuration**: Province-specific tile servers configured
- **Dependencies**: All packages ready for installation via `uv`

## 📋 **Next Phase Planning**

### **Phase 2: Multi-Province Validation** (UPCOMING)
**Objective**: Confirm database handles multiple provinces safely

**Strategy**:
1. **Second Province Test**: Small grid in different province (Eastern or different Riyadh area)
2. **Verify No Conflicts**: Ensure data separation and no overwriting
3. **Test Enrichment**: Validate API integration with multi-province data

### **Phase 3: Full Province Scale** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Scale to complete province processing

**Scope**: 
- Full Riyadh province (52x52 grid showed 1M+ parcels in previous testing)
- All 6 Saudi provinces (estimated 6M+ parcels total)
- Dynamic boundary discovery system development

## 🎯 **Active Decisions and Considerations**

### **Commercial Focus**
- **Primary Goal**: Extract Saudi real estate data for client analytics products
- **Revenue Model**: Data capture and value-add services for client sales
- **Not Platform Development**: This is data extraction, not Suhail platform enhancement

### **Technical Priorities**
1. **Database as Source of Truth**: Fresh schema is authoritative, all docs must align
2. **Systematic Validation**: Don't skip testing phases - validate each step
3. **Multi-Province Capability**: Ensure architecture scales across all 6 provinces
4. **Chunked Processing**: Handle large datasets efficiently with proper batching

### **Development Approach**
- **Start Small**: 3x3 baseline test first
- **Scale Gradually**: Multi-province → Full province → All provinces
- **Track Performance**: Monitor processing times and database performance
- **Maintain Quality**: High enrichment success rates and data integrity

## 🛠 **Current Technical Context**

### **Database Architecture**
- **Type**: PostgreSQL with PostGIS spatial extensions
- **State**: Recently reset with robust schema design
- **Migration Tool**: Alembic for all schema changes
- **Design**: Multi-province capable with proper foreign key relationships

### **Pipeline Architecture**
- **Language**: Python 3.11+ with async/await patterns
- **Processing**: Chunked batch processing with memory management
- **API Integration**: Suhail API endpoints for enrichment data
- **CLI**: Unified command interface for all operations

### **Data Sources**
- **MVT Tiles**: Province-specific tile servers (riyadh, eastern_region, etc.)
- **Enrichment APIs**: api2.suhail.ai for transactions, building rules, price metrics
- **Coordinate System**: EPSG:4326 with proper CRS handling

## 📊 **Success Metrics for Current Phase**

### **Baseline Validation Success**
- [ ] 3x3 grid processes without errors
- [ ] Database populated with expected structure
- [ ] Foreign key relationships functional
- [ ] Enrichment success rate >95%
- [ ] No pipeline errors or data corruption

### **Technical Validation Success**
- [ ] Package installation works smoothly
- [ ] CLI commands execute properly
- [ ] Database connections stable
- [ ] Memory usage reasonable
- [ ] Processing times acceptable

### **Quality Assurance Success**
- [ ] Spatial data accuracy maintained
- [ ] Arabic text handling works properly
- [ ] API integration functional
- [ ] Error handling graceful
- [ ] Logging comprehensive

## 🔄 **Current Work Environment**

### **Development Setup**
```bash
# Environment activation
source .venv/bin/activate

# Package installation
uv add -e .

# Core testing commands
meshic-pipeline geometric               # 3x3 baseline test
meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100  # Enrichment validation
python scripts/check_db.py             # Database validation
```

### **Git Workflow**
```bash
# Current branch
test/3x3-riyadh-baseline

# Success tagging strategy
git tag v0.1.1-3x3-validated    # After successful baseline
git tag v0.1.2-enrichment-validated   # After enrichment success
```

## 📝 **Documentation Alignment Status**

### **Memory Bank Accuracy**
- ✅ **Project Brief**: Updated to reflect commercial objectives
- ✅ **TODO.md**: Rewritten for actual baseline validation plan
- 🔄 **Active Context**: Currently being updated (this file)
- 🔄 **Progress**: Needs update to reflect fresh database state
- 🔄 **System Patterns**: Needs alignment with actual implementation
- 🔄 **Tech Context**: Needs update for baseline testing scope

### **Critical Corrections Made**
- **Scale Claims**: Removed inflated parcel counts - database is empty
- **Enhanced Discovery**: Removed claims about working hotspot system - needs to be built
- **Business Context**: Clarified commercial data capture vs platform development
- **Current State**: Emphasized fresh database and baseline testing approach

## 🎯 **Immediate Next Steps**

1. **Complete Memory Bank Alignment**: Finish updating all files to reflect reality
2. **Execute Baseline Test**: Run 3x3 pipeline and validate results
3. **Document Actual Results**: Update progress with real metrics from testing
4. **Plan Multi-Province Test**: Prepare for next validation phase
5. **Track Performance**: Establish baseline metrics for scaling decisions

This active context reflects the actual current state: fresh database, commercial objectives, and systematic baseline validation approach to build a robust foundation for full Saudi Arabia data capture.

## Pipeline Table Uniqueness & Upsert Robustness (May 2024)

- The pipeline previously assumed all output tables were upsert-ready, but many are dynamically created without unique constraints.
- A new action plan is in place:
  - Remove unreliable upsert keys from config for tables without unique constraints.
  - Add unique constraints via Alembic for upsertable tables.
  - Use replace mode for tables where uniqueness is not possible.
  - Test the pipeline after changes.
  - Update documentation and communicate changes to the team.
- See WHAT_TO_DO_NEXT_PIPELINE_TABLES.md for the full step-by-step plan.

## Next Steps
- Config cleanup
- Alembic migration for constraints
- Pipeline test run
- Documentation update
