memory-bank/progress.md, before:

# Progress (Updated)

- Geometric pipeline for 3x3 Riyadh grid now runs to completion with robust handling of mixed geometry types and temp table creation.
- All recent fixes for geometry type handling, empty DataFrame writes, and temp table schema have been merged and validated.
- Database is populated with parcels and reference tables from the 3x3 grid.
- No pipeline errors or data corruption observed in geometric processing.
- **Enrichment pipeline for 3x3 Riyadh grid was run successfully: 100 parcels processed, 10 transactions, 0 building rules, and 200 price metrics added.**
- **Enrichment phase for baseline is marked as successful.**
- Next step: multi-province testing.
- Memory bank and documentation are being updated to reflect the new stable baseline.

## 🎯 **Current Phase: Baseline Validation Complete**

### **Project Reset: COMPLETED**
- ✅ **Database Reset**: Fresh PostgreSQL/PostGIS database created with robust schema
- ✅ **Git Cleanup**: Repository cleaned (27 outdated files removed, 5,756 deletions)
- ✅ **Baseline Tag**: `v0.1.0-baseline` established for clean starting point
- ✅ **Memory Bank Alignment**: Documentation updated to reflect actual current state
- ✅ **Commercial Objectives**: Clear focus on client data products (not platform development)

### **Architecture Foundation: READY**
- ✅ **Database Schema**: Fresh Alembic migration with robust PostGIS design
- ✅ **Pipeline Components**: Functional async architecture components ready for testing
- ✅ **Configuration**: Province-specific tile servers and API endpoints configured
- ✅ **CLI Interface**: Unified command interface ready for validation

## 🔄 **Phase 1 Baseline Validation: COMPLETE**

### **1.1 Environment Setup**
**Status**: Complete

**Tasks**:
- [x] **Package Installation**: Install meshic-pipeline with `uv add -e .`
- [x] **Environment Activation**: Source virtual environment
- [x] **Database Connection**: Verify PostgreSQL/PostGIS connectivity
- [x] **Configuration Validation**: Confirm pipeline settings

**Outcome**: Development environment ready for testing

### **1.2 3x3 Riyadh Baseline Test**
**Status**: Complete

**Scope**:
- **Grid**: 3x3 tiles (9 tiles total) in central Riyadh
- **Expected Volume**: ~1,000-2,000 parcels for validation
- **Purpose**: Confirm basic pipeline functionality with fresh database

**Tasks**:
- [x] **Execute Geometric Pipeline**: Run `meshic-pipeline geometric`
- [x] **Verify Database Population**: Check parcels and reference tables
- [x] **Validate Data Types**: Confirm proper schema alignment
- [x] **Check Foreign Keys**: Verify relationship integrity
- [x] **Performance Monitoring**: Track processing time and memory usage

**Success Criteria**:
- Database populated with parcel data
- All reference tables populated from MVT data
- Foreign key relationships functional
- No pipeline errors or data corruption

### **1.3 Enrichment Pipeline Test** (COMPLETE)
**Status**: Complete

**Tasks**:
- [x] **API Integration Test**: Run `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100` (**Success: 100 parcels processed, 10 transactions, 0 building rules, 200 price metrics added**)
- [x] **Success Rate Monitoring**: Track enrichment coverage percentage (see Results below)
- [x] **Endpoint Validation**: All 3 API endpoints responsive (transactions, building rules, price metrics)
- [x] **Data Quality Check**: Enrichment data written to DB, no errors
- [x] **Arabic Text Validation**: Unicode/Arabic text handled correctly

**Success Criteria**:
- High enrichment success rate (95%+ expected; see Results)
- All API endpoints responsive
- Clean data in enrichment tables
- Proper Arabic text storage

**Results**:
- 100 parcels processed
- 10 transactions added
- 0 building rules added
- 200 price metrics added
- No errors or data corruption

## 📋 **Planned: Phase 2 Multi-Province Validation**

### **2.1 Second Province Test** (UPCOMING)
**Objective**: Validate database handles multiple provinces safely

**Strategy**:
- Select different province (Eastern or different Riyadh area)
- Small grid test (3x3 or 5x5)
- Verify no data conflicts with baseline
- Test enrichment with multi-province data

### **2.2 Database Scale Test** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Validate architecture at larger scale

**Approach**:
- Larger grid processing
- Performance monitoring
- Memory usage tracking
- Database optimization needs assessment

## 📋 **Planned: Phase 3 Full Province Scale**

### **3.1 Complete Province Processing** (FUTURE)
**Scope**: Full Riyadh province (based on 52x52 = 1M+ parcels from previous testing)

### **3.2 All 6 Provinces Rollout** (FUTURE)
**Scope**: Complete Saudi Arabia coverage

**Provinces**: Riyadh, Eastern, Madinah, Makkah, Al_Qassim, Asir
**Estimated Volume**: 6M+ parcels (based on Riyadh extrapolation)

### **3.3 Dynamic Boundary Discovery** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Build automated province extent detection

**Approach**:
- Lower zoom level admin boundary detection
- Automated bbox extraction
- Dynamic tile list generation
- Eliminate manual coordinate management

## 📊 **Current Metrics: Baseline Established**

### **Database State**
- **Tables**: Fresh schema with 3x3 grid data populated
- **Foreign Keys**: 4 relationships designed and validated
- **Data Types**: Optimized schema for MVT data alignment
- **Performance**: Baseline established with first data

### **Pipeline Architecture**
- **Components**: Functional async design validated
- **Error Handling**: Comprehensive exception management in place
- **Memory Management**: Chunked processing patterns implemented
- **Configuration**: Flexible province-specific settings

### **Baseline Metrics**
- **Processing Time**: Measured for 3x3 grid (9 tiles)
- **Memory Usage**: Tracked during baseline testing
- **Enrichment Success**: To be measured in next phase
- **Database Performance**: Sub-second queries on test data

## 🏗️ **Technical Architecture Status**

### **Database Design: READY**
- ✅ **PostGIS Schema**: Fresh robust design with proper spatial indexes
- ✅ **Foreign Keys**: 4 relationships designed for referential integrity
- ✅ **Data Types**: Optimized for MVT source alignment
- ✅ **Migration System**: Alembic configured for schema management

### **Pipeline Components: READY**
- ✅ **Async Architecture**: Functional design with proper resource management
- ✅ **MVT Processing**: Tile downloading, decoding, and stitching components
- ✅ **API Integration**: Suhail API client for enrichment data
- ✅ **CLI Interface**: Unified command system for all operations

### **Configuration: READY**
- ✅ **Province Servers**: Tile servers mapped for all 6 provinces
- ✅ **API Endpoints**: api2.suhail.ai integration configured
- ✅ **Environment**: Development setup with production patterns
- ✅ **Logging**: Comprehensive observability and monitoring

## 🎯 **Success Indicators: Baseline Achieved**

### **Phase 1 Success Criteria**
- [x] 3x3 grid processes without errors
- [x] Database properly populated with expected structure
- [x] Foreign key relationships functional
- [x] Enrichment pipeline operational and validated
- [x] Performance metrics within acceptable ranges

### **Technical Quality Indicators**
- [x] Zero data corruption during processing
- [x] Proper spatial data accuracy
- [x] Unicode text handling (Arabic support)
- [x] Memory usage within reasonable limits
- [x] Database query performance optimal

### **Commercial Readiness Indicators**
- [x] Scalable architecture proven at small scale
- [x] Data quality suitable for client products
- [x] Processing efficiency adequate for production
- [x] Error handling robust for automated operations

## 🔄 **Development Workflow Status**

### **Current Git Strategy**
- **Branch**: `test/3x3-riyadh-baseline` for validation work
- **Tagging**: Progressive tags for each milestone
- **Conventions**: Following established commit patterns
- **Documentation**: Memory bank updated with each phase

### **Testing Approach**
- **Start Small**: 3x3 baseline validation first (now complete)
- **Scale Gradually**: Incremental growth to full provinces
- **Monitor Performance**: Track metrics at each scale
- **Document Results**: Update progress with actual measurements

### **Quality Assurance**
- **Database Integrity**: Schema validation and constraint checking
- **Pipeline Testing**: End-to-end workflow validation
- **Performance Monitoring**: Resource usage and timing tracking
- **Error Handling**: Graceful failure and recovery testing

## 📈 **Key Metrics: Baseline Established**

### **Current Status: Baseline Complete**
- **Data Volume**: 3x3 grid data populated
- **Processing History**: Baseline run complete
- **Performance Baselines**: Established
- **Success Rates**: To be tracked in enrichment phase

### **Target Metrics for Next Phase**
- **Enrichment Success**: 95%+ target rate
- **Processing Time**: Efficient completion expected
- **Database Performance**: Sub-second query response

### **Future Scale Projections**
- **Full Riyadh**: 1M+ parcels (based on 52x52 previous testing)
- **All Provinces**: 6M+ parcels estimated
- **Commercial Scale**: Ready for client data products

## 🏆 **Project Value Proposition**

### **Commercial Benefits**
- **Market Data**: Comprehensive Saudi real estate coverage
- **Client Products**: Rich analytics and insights capabilities
- **Scalable Architecture**: Ready for production deployment
- **Quality Foundation**: Robust data processing and validation

### **Technical Achievements**
- **Modern Architecture**: Async Python with PostGIS spatial database
- **Data Integrity**: Foreign key relationships and type safety
- **Performance Optimization**: Chunked processing and memory management
- **Operational Readiness**: CLI tools and monitoring capabilities

This progress status reflects the actual current state: geometric pipeline validated, database populated, and ready for enrichment and multi-province testing.

## 🆕 Province Sync & Schema Alignment (Completed)
- Province sync script created and integrated; authoritative province data is always present before pipeline runs.
- Schema updated: `parcels` table now includes nullable `region_id` (BIGINT).
- All schema changes managed via Alembic migrations.
- Geometric and enrichment pipelines run successfully end-to-end with no errors.
- For reproducibility, recommend DB reset + sync + pipeline run in CI/CD.

## 🛠️ CLI Command Reference & Workflow Mapping

> For a complete, up-to-date audit, see [`docs/CLI_COMMAND_AUDIT.md`](../docs/CLI_COMMAND_AUDIT.md) and the README.

### Core Commands
- `meshic-pipeline geometric [--bbox ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline incremental-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--days-old ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline full-refresh [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline delta-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...] [--fresh-table ...] [--auto-geometric] [--show-details/--no-details]`

### Advanced/Composite Commands
- `meshic-pipeline smart-pipeline [--geometric-first] [--batch-size ...] [--bbox ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline monitor <status|recommend|schedule-info>`
- `meshic-pipeline province-geometric <province> [--strategy ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline saudi-arabia-geometric [--strategy ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline discovery-summary`
- `meshic-pipeline province-pipeline <province> [--strategy ...] [--batch-size ...] [--geometric-first]`
- `meshic-pipeline saudi-pipeline [--strategy ...] [--batch-size ...] [--geometric-first]`

### Phase-by-Phase Command Usage
- **Baseline/3x3 Grid:**
  - Used: `geometric`, `fast-enrich`
- **Multi-Province Validation:**
  - Recommended: `province-geometric`, `province-pipeline`, `incremental-enrich`, `delta-enrich`
- **Full Province Scale:**
  - Recommended: `province-geometric`, `province-pipeline`, `full-refresh`, `delta-enrich`
- **All Provinces (Future):**
  - Recommended: `saudi-arabia-geometric`, `saudi-pipeline`, `delta-enrich`
- **Monitoring/Ops:**
  - Used/Recommended: `monitor status`, `monitor recommend`, `monitor schedule-info`

> Always consult the README and CLI audit for the latest command options and usage patterns.

Commit message:

docs: update documentation for DB-driven tile discovery and province-wide scraping

memory-bank/progress.md, after:

# Progress (Updated)

- Geometric pipeline for 3x3 Riyadh grid now runs to completion with robust handling of mixed geometry types and temp table creation.
- All recent fixes for geometry type handling, empty DataFrame writes, and temp table schema have been merged and validated.
- Database is populated with parcels and reference tables from the 3x3 grid.
- No pipeline errors or data corruption observed in geometric processing.
- **Enrichment pipeline for 3x3 Riyadh grid was run successfully: 100 parcels processed, 10 transactions, 0 building rules, and 200 price metrics added.**
- **Enrichment phase for baseline is marked as successful.**
- **DB-driven tile discovery and orchestration is now implemented: all tiles to be processed are stored in the `tile_urls` table, supporting province-wide and all-Saudi scrapes with resumable processing.**
- Next step: multi-province and all-Saudi testing.
- Memory bank and documentation are being updated to reflect the new DB-driven pipeline.

## 🎯 **Current Phase: Baseline Validation Complete**

### **Project Reset: COMPLETED**
- ✅ **Database Reset**: Fresh PostgreSQL/PostGIS database created with robust schema
- ✅ **Git Cleanup**: Repository cleaned (27 outdated files removed, 5,756 deletions)
- ✅ **Baseline Tag**: `v0.1.0-baseline` established for clean starting point
- ✅ **Memory Bank Alignment**: Documentation updated to reflect actual current state
- ✅ **Commercial Objectives**: Clear focus on client data products (not platform development)

### **Architecture Foundation: READY**
- ✅ **Database Schema**: Fresh Alembic migration with robust PostGIS design
- ✅ **Pipeline Components**: Functional async architecture components ready for testing
- ✅ **Configuration**: Province-specific tile servers and API endpoints configured
- ✅ **CLI Interface**: Unified command interface ready for validation

## 🔄 **Phase 1 Baseline Validation: COMPLETE**

### **1.1 Environment Setup**
**Status**: Complete

**Tasks**:
- [x] **Package Installation**: Install meshic-pipeline with `uv add -e .`
- [x] **Environment Activation**: Source virtual environment
- [x] **Database Connection**: Verify PostgreSQL/PostGIS connectivity
- [x] **Configuration Validation**: Confirm pipeline settings

**Outcome**: Development environment ready for testing

### **1.2 3x3 Riyadh Baseline Test**
**Status**: Complete

**Scope**:
- **Grid**: 3x3 tiles (9 tiles total) in central Riyadh
- **Expected Volume**: ~1,000-2,000 parcels for validation
- **Purpose**: Confirm basic pipeline functionality with fresh database

**Tasks**:
- [x] **Execute Geometric Pipeline**: Run `meshic-pipeline geometric`
- [x] **Verify Database Population**: Check parcels and reference tables
- [x] **Validate Data Types**: Confirm proper schema alignment
- [x] **Check Foreign Keys**: Verify relationship integrity
- [x] **Performance Monitoring**: Track processing time and memory usage

**Success Criteria**:
- Database populated with parcel data
- All reference tables populated from MVT data
- Foreign key relationships functional
- No pipeline errors or data corruption

### **1.3 Enrichment Pipeline Test** (COMPLETE)
**Status**: Complete

**Tasks**:
- [x] **API Integration Test**: Run `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich --limit 100` (**Success: 100 parcels processed, 10 transactions, 0 building rules, 200 price metrics added**)
- [x] **Success Rate Monitoring**: Track enrichment coverage percentage (see Results below)
- [x] **Endpoint Validation**: All 3 API endpoints responsive (transactions, building rules, price metrics)
- [x] **Data Quality Check**: Enrichment data written to DB, no errors
- [x] **Arabic Text Validation**: Unicode/Arabic text handled correctly

**Success Criteria**:
- High enrichment success rate (95%+ expected; see Results)
- All API endpoints responsive
- Clean data in enrichment tables
- Proper Arabic text storage

**Results**:
- 100 parcels processed
- 10 transactions added
- 0 building rules added
- 200 price metrics added
- No errors or data corruption

## 📋 **Planned: Phase 2 Multi-Province Validation**

### **2.1 Second Province Test** (UPCOMING)
**Objective**: Validate database handles multiple provinces safely

**Strategy**:
- Select different province (Eastern or different Riyadh area)
- Small grid test (3x3 or 5x5)
- Verify no data conflicts with baseline
- Test enrichment with multi-province data

### **2.2 Database Scale Test** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Validate architecture at larger scale

**Approach**:
- Larger grid processing
- Performance monitoring
- Memory usage tracking
- Database optimization needs assessment

## 📋 **Planned: Phase 3 Full Province Scale**

### **3.1 Complete Province Processing** (FUTURE)
**Scope**: Full Riyadh province (based on 52x52 = 1M+ parcels from previous testing)

### **3.2 All 6 Provinces Rollout** (FUTURE)
**Scope**: Complete Saudi Arabia coverage

**Provinces**: Riyadh, Eastern, Madinah, Makkah, Al_Qassim, Asir
**Estimated Volume**: 6M+ parcels (based on Riyadh extrapolation)

### **3.3 Dynamic Boundary Discovery** (FUTURE)
**Objective**: Build automated province extent detection

**Approach**:
- Lower zoom level admin boundary detection
- Automated bbox extraction
- Dynamic tile list generation
- Eliminate manual coordinate management

## 📊 **Current Metrics: Baseline Established**

### **Database State**
- **Tables**: Fresh schema with 3x3 grid data populated
- **Foreign Keys**: 4 relationships designed and validated
- **Data Types**: Optimized schema for MVT data alignment
- **Performance**: Baseline established with first data

### **Pipeline Architecture**
- **Components**: Functional async design validated
- **Error Handling**: Comprehensive exception management in place
- **Memory Management**: Chunked processing patterns implemented
- **Configuration**: Flexible province-specific settings

### **Baseline Metrics**
- **Processing Time**: Measured for 3x3 grid (9 tiles)
- **Memory Usage**: Tracked during baseline testing
- **Enrichment Success**: To be measured in next phase
- **Database Performance**: Sub-second queries on test data

## 🏗️ **Technical Architecture Status**

### **Database Design: READY**
- ✅ **PostGIS Schema**: Fresh robust design with proper spatial indexes
- ✅ **Foreign Keys**: 4 relationships designed for referential integrity
- ✅ **Data Types**: Optimized for MVT source alignment
- ✅ **Migration System**: Alembic configured for schema management

### **Pipeline Components: READY**
- ✅ **Async Architecture**: Functional design with proper resource management
- ✅ **MVT Processing**: Tile downloading, decoding, and stitching components
- ✅ **API Integration**: Suhail API client for enrichment data
- ✅ **CLI Interface**: Unified command system for all operations

### **Configuration: READY**
- ✅ **Province Servers**: Tile servers mapped for all 6 provinces
- ✅ **API Endpoints**: api2.suhail.ai integration configured
- ✅ **Environment**: Development setup with production patterns
- ✅ **Logging**: Comprehensive observability and monitoring

## 🎯 **Success Indicators: Baseline Achieved**

### **Phase 1 Success Criteria**
- [x] 3x3 grid processes without errors
- [x] Database properly populated with expected structure
- [x] Foreign key relationships functional
- [x] Enrichment pipeline operational and validated
- [x] Performance metrics within acceptable ranges

### **Technical Quality Indicators**
- [x] Zero data corruption during processing
- [x] Proper spatial data accuracy
- [x] Unicode text handling (Arabic support)
- [x] Memory usage within reasonable limits
- [x] Database query performance optimal

### **Commercial Readiness Indicators**
- [x] Scalable architecture proven at small scale
- [x] Data quality suitable for client products
- [x] Processing efficiency adequate for production
- [x] Error handling robust for automated operations

## 🔄 **Development Workflow Status**

### **Current Git Strategy**
- **Branch**: `test/3x3-riyadh-baseline` for validation work
- **Tagging**: Progressive tags for each milestone
- **Conventions**: Following established commit patterns
- **Documentation**: Memory bank updated with each phase

### **Testing Approach**
- **Start Small**: 3x3 baseline validation first (now complete)
- **Scale Gradually**: Incremental growth to full provinces
- **Monitor Performance**: Track metrics at each scale
- **Document Results**: Update progress with actual measurements

### **Quality Assurance**
- **Database Integrity**: Schema validation and constraint checking
- **Pipeline Testing**: End-to-end workflow validation
- **Performance Monitoring**: Resource usage and timing tracking
- **Error Handling**: Graceful failure and recovery testing

## 📈 **Key Metrics: Baseline Established**

### **Current Status: Baseline Complete**
- **Data Volume**: 3x3 grid data populated
- **Processing History**: Baseline run complete
- **Performance Baselines**: Established
- **Success Rates**: To be tracked in enrichment phase

### **Target Metrics for Next Phase**
- **Enrichment Success**: 95%+ target rate
- **Processing Time**: Efficient completion expected
- **Database Performance**: Sub-second query response

### **Future Scale Projections**
- **Full Riyadh**: 1M+ parcels (based on 52x52 previous testing)
- **All Provinces**: 6M+ parcels estimated
- **Commercial Scale**: Ready for client data products

## 🏆 **Project Value Proposition**

### **Commercial Benefits**
- **Market Data**: Comprehensive Saudi real estate coverage
- **Client Products**: Rich analytics and insights capabilities
- **Scalable Architecture**: Ready for production deployment
- **Quality Foundation**: Robust data processing and validation

### **Technical Achievements**
- **Modern Architecture**: Async Python with PostGIS spatial database
- **Data Integrity**: Foreign key relationships and type safety
- **Performance Optimization**: Chunked processing and memory management
- **Operational Readiness**: CLI tools and monitoring capabilities

This progress status reflects the actual current state: geometric pipeline validated, database populated, and ready for enrichment and multi-province testing.

## 🆕 Province Sync & Schema Alignment (Completed)
- Province sync script created and integrated; authoritative province data is always present before pipeline runs.
- Schema updated: `parcels` table now includes nullable `region_id` (BIGINT).
- All schema changes managed via Alembic migrations.
- Geometric and enrichment pipelines run successfully end-to-end with no errors.
- For reproducibility, recommend DB reset + sync + pipeline run in CI/CD.

## 🛠️ CLI Command Reference & Workflow Mapping

> For a complete, up-to-date audit, see [`docs/CLI_COMMAND_AUDIT.md`](../docs/CLI_COMMAND_AUDIT.md) and the README.

### Core Commands
- `meshic-pipeline geometric [--bbox ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline fast-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline incremental-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--days-old ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline full-refresh [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline delta-enrich [--batch-size ...] [--limit ...] [--fresh-table ...] [--auto-geometric] [--show-details/--no-details]`

### Advanced/Composite Commands
- `meshic-pipeline smart-pipeline [--geometric-first] [--batch-size ...] [--bbox ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline monitor <status|recommend|schedule-info>`
- `meshic-pipeline province-geometric <province> [--strategy ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline saudi-arabia-geometric [--strategy ...] [--recreate-db] [--save-as-temp ...]`
- `meshic-pipeline discovery-summary`
- `meshic-pipeline province-pipeline <province> [--strategy ...] [--batch-size ...] [--geometric-first]`
- `meshic-pipeline saudi-pipeline [--strategy ...] [--batch-size ...] [--geometric-first]`

### Phase-by-Phase Command Usage
- **Baseline/3x3 Grid:**
  - Used: `geometric`, `fast-enrich`
- **Multi-Province Validation:**
  - Recommended: `province-geometric`, `province-pipeline`, `incremental-enrich`, `delta-enrich`
- **Full Province Scale:**
  - Recommended: `province-geometric`, `province-pipeline`, `full-refresh`, `delta-enrich`
- **All Provinces (Future):**
  - Recommended: `saudi-arabia-geometric`, `saudi-pipeline`, `delta-enrich`
- **Monitoring/Ops:**
  - Used/Recommended: `monitor status`, `monitor recommend`, `monitor schedule-info`

> Always consult the README and CLI audit for the latest command options and usage patterns.
